Abstract 
The dispersed solution of Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) has been utilized in different industrial and laboratory applications such as electrodes of batteries, super capacitors, gas sensors etc. There are many difficulties and challenges to make a stable suspension of SWCNT as they tend to self-associate into clusters. These clusters have to be dispersed before they could be used for different applications. In this research, an effort has been made to reduce the agglomeration of SWCNT by sonication in presence of Direct Current field (DC). It was found that sonication under the DC field has increased the degree of dispersion. Furthermore, the result shows that SWCNT can be dispersed with or without use of any surfactants by sonication in presence of DC field. The use of surfactants could increase the impurity content of dispersed solution which was reduced by our modified method of dispersion. Additionally, it is shown that our modified method can be used to study dispersion with minimal use of expensive chemicals like SWCNTs. 
Keywords: Dispersion, SWCNT, Direct Current field (DC), Ultra water bath sonication, Surfactants, Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS). 



. Introduction 
Dispersion is a process in which particles are distributed homogeneously throughout the continuous fluid phase []. Dispersing particle is vital process before they could be used for further application []. When mixing powdered materials like SWCNTs in liquids to prepare a stable dispersion they have a tendency to clump together resulting in sedimentation of SWCNT in bottom. Since the discovery of SWCNT in early s by Iijima [], they have been gaining popularity and considered as a candidate material in industrial and laboratory applications like biosensors, field emission devices, electronic components, super capacitors, electrode of the battery, solar cells [-] because of their superior mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical and magnetic properties [-]. Before they could be used for several applications a well dispersed solution has to be prepared at first which is basically done by physical or chemical method. However, the implication of SWCNTs is restricted by low solubility in aqueous solution as they self-associate to form agglomeration due to strong Van der Waals force of attraction. SWCNTs are strictly entangled, and found in bundle and cluster state which are thermodynamically stabilized by strong π-π interaction and stronger Van Waals binding energy []. For obtaining a stable dispersion these interaction forces have to be overcome by external supply of energy. For this numerous techniques have been used including ultrasonication, centrifugation, addition of surfactants, chemical functionalization of SWCNTs []. Remarkable progress has been reported in the field of dispersion of SWCNT in aqueous and organic solvents. Under physical approach Sandler et al. [] reported that the application of intense stirring can produce good dispersion of SWCNTs and ultracentrifugation helps to remove some metallic and carbonaceous impurities present in SWCNTs. Further Pascula [] studied the dispersion of SWCNT in various organic solvent by covalent functionalization and reported increase in degree of dispersion. Different types of surfactants have been used in dispersion of SWCNTs such as, octyl phenol ethoxylate (Triton X-) [], hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) [] sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate (SDBS) []. Ostos et al. [] and Rudyak et al. [] used sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to disperse SWCNT, due to their excellent ability to exfoliate the nanotube in aqueous solution. The optimum value of SDS has to be used for robust dispersion of SWCNT considering surfactants critical micelle concentration (CMC). Below the CMC value formation of micelle occurs which decreases the dispersion [] however, the performance of surfactant increases above CMC value []. Most of the dispersion of nanomaterials are carried out with surfactant modifications. Although the use of surfactants increases the degree of dispersion [], when SWCNT thin films are made, these adsorbed surfactants act as an insulator increasing the contact resistance of nanotubes. Therefore, in the dispersion of SWCNTs, the use of surfactant increases the impurity content and drastically reduces the electrical conductivity of SWCNT []. To remove the surfactants, post treatment of dispersed SWCNT has to be carried which destroys SWCNT films and is also a lengthy process []. The excessive use of surfactants like SDS, SDBS has adverse effects on human health as they are reported to adsorb through skin causing skin damage, narrowing the liver and causing chronic symptoms such as teratogenic and carcinogenic []. Therefore, it is essential to control and reduce or omit the usage of surfactants on a daily basis. The dispersion of Carbon Nanotube can be improved with the application of in situ Direct Current (DC) field and Alternate Current (AC) fields. Zhu Yue [] et al. reported the enhancement in dispersion of carbon nanotubes with surfactants at a static DC field along with sonication. Similarly, Zhang Chang et al. [] reported the increase in dispersion of MWCNT under AC field. Moreover, Pandey et al. [] reported the better dispersion of activated carbon under DC field in aqueous solution with surfactant. In spite of their contribution in dispersion of SWCNT, the influence of DC field in dispersion of SWCNT without surfactant (SDS) has not been carried out yet. In this work we have focused on minimizing the use of SWCNT and dispersion of SWCNT without any surfactants. 

. Experimental details 
The SWCNTs purchased from Nanoshel and surfactant (SDS) purchased from Fisher Scientific, Qualigens, were used without any treatment/purification. All the solution was prepared in distilled water. Ultrasound water bath sonicator of power  W was used for sonication and a  W CPU power supply was used for variable DC field. The schematic diagram of the proposed experiment is as shown in Figure . Initially aluminum plates of dimension ×. cm were cut, and inserted in a rubber cork of length . cm maintaining a separation of  mm between them which acts as parallel plate electrodes as shown in Figure . The solution was kept in glass bottle and electrode fitted cork was inserted at the opening of glass bottle to perform sonication process. 
In order to study the dispersion with minimal use of expensive chemicals like SWCNT, experiments were performed as below.  mg of SWCNTs was mixed with  mg of SDS in  ml of distilled water and sonicated for  hours. In this way  samples of  ml of SWCNT solution with concentration of . gm/l was prepared with the use of only  mg of SWCNT. Further these samples were diluted by adding  ml of distilled water and sonication was performed for  minute,  minutes and  hour followed by  hours of ambient sedimentation. The homogeneous distribution of SWCNT in all  samples was tested immediately by measuring absorbance after distributing the solution in  bottles. Further to study the effect of the DC field in dispersion of SWCNT without any surfactant (SDS), solutions of SWCNT ( mg) in  ml distilled water were prepared in two separate bottles. The solution was sonicated for different sonication times of  minutes,  minutes,  hour,  hour and  hours under the DC field of  V and  V. These solutions were then kept for  hours of sedimentation in dark ambient conditions. The dispersion of SWCNT was studied by measuring absorbance using a visible spectrophotometer. The absorbance of solvent was subtracted from that of nanotube dispersion in order to remove the solvent effect. 

 a) b) 
Fig.  
a Schematic setup for dispersion of SWCNT in ultrasound bath sonication with various DC fields. 
b Glass 
bottle containing SWCNT solution and aluminum electrodes fitted in rubber cork 


. Results and Discussion 
Figure  shows the absorbance of . mg/ ml of SWCNT solution prepared by our modified method and taken immediately after  hours of sonication and transferred to different cuvette. In figure  it is seen that at low wavelength region absorbance decreases rapidly up to region  nm then it decreases slowly up to near infra-red region with very mild peak at around  to  nm. SWCNT shows peak at around  to  nm in UV region [] and its tail extends to visible region as seen in figure . The mild peak seen at around nm is M peak of SWCNT which is also described in the discussion part. Furthermore, from the figure  it is seen that the absorbance of SWCNT solution decreases from visible to near Infra-red region, which is partly due to scattering in lower wavelength regions [ , ]. In addition, the drop of absorbance and random fluctuation beyond the visible region is possibly due to our instrumental limitation because we used a spectrophotometer (ocean optics USB ) which is addressed for the visible spectrum. From the figure it is clearly seen that all the five samples have nearly the same absorbance. This implies that the amount of SWCNT is equally distributed in all samples. These samples were further used to study the influence of the DC field in dispersion of SWCNT. In conventional methods we would require . mg of SWCNT to prepare  ml of required SWCNT solution. We cannot use - gm sensitive balance to weight this small amount of SWCNT and even by using - gm sensitive balance we cannot measure this amount accurately. Thus our modified method can be successfully used to study dispersion with minimal use of expensive chemicals like SWCNT. 
 
Fig.  Homogeneity plot of  different samples taken immediately after  hours of sonication 
Figure  shows the absorbance of SWCNT and SDS (weight ratio of SWCNT: SDS = ) solution taken after sonication for  minutes under different voltages  V,  V,  V,  V and  V and  hours of ambient sedimentation. In figure the broad peak at - nm wavelength was observed in all cases. The broad peak at around - nm was much pronounced when DC voltage was  V but this peak decreased when DC voltage was increased from  V to  V. In figure  two significant peaks at wavelength around  nm and  nm were seen for  V samples. These peaks are the characteristic absorbance peak shown by  dimensional material like SWCNT known as  D Van Hove Singularity []. The absorbance features are grouped into  categories in the observed absorbance range: two semi- conducting regions S (-) nm and S (-) nm and a metallic M (-) nm [,]. In our case M and S peaks were observed for  V samples. However, these peaks were low for  V, V, V and  V cases. When the DC field was increased from  V to  V the absorbance of the sample increased but it was found to decrease as the DC voltage was increased further. Thus SWCNT and SDS solution was best dispersed when sonicated in presence of  V DC field. We have repeated the same experiment for  minutes and  hours of sonication under different DC voltages and similar results were obtained. 
  Fig.  Absorbance of dispersed solutions after  minutes of sonication under different DC fields 
  
In order to see the variation of absorbance of dispersed solution with different DC fields more clearly, average of absorbance in visible range - nm wavelength has been plotted. Figure  shows the average of absorbance in the visible range of sample sonicated for  minutes under different DC fields. When the DC voltage increases up to  V the average absorbance increases. On further increasing the DC field absorbance decreases. Figure  shows the absorbance spectra of SWCNT in distilled water sonicated under influence of DC field for  minutes and  hours. Initially after  minutes of sonication noticeable low absorbance in visible range was observed for the V sample. This is due to low dispersion of SWCNT as well as oxidation of metal oxides present in SWCNTs as impurities []. However, a noticeable amount of absorbance was observed even at  minutes of sonication for  V case. 
       

Time of Sonication : minutes
sedimentation time :  hours Absorbance (a.u)

 
Fig.  Average absorbance of sample solution sonicated for  minutes under different DC field and  hours of 
sedimentation 
On increasing the sonication time to  hours the absorbance increases and the characteristic absorbance peaks S (-) nm and M (-) nm were seen. This implies that SWCNT is well dispersed when sonicated under the V DC field in absence of surfactants. 
 (a) (b) 
Fig.  Absorbance of dispersed solutions after a  minutes and b  hours of sonication under the influence of  V 
and  V DC field and  hours of sedimentation 
To compare the dispersibility of  V and  V DC field on dispersion of SWCNT with sonication time, graphs were plotted for different sonication time. Figure  (a) and (b) shows the absorbance spectra of dispersed SWCNT solution sonicated at different time of  minutes,  minutes,  hour,  hours and  hours under DC field of  V and  V 
respectively. 

Average Absorbance Sonication time=  minutes Sedimentation time=  hours

Sonication time =  Minutes
sedimentation time =  hours Applied Voltage

Sonication time =  hours Sedimentation time =  hoursApplied voltage Average absorbance(a.u) Absorbance (a.u) Absorbance (a.u)
 
 (a) (b) 
Fig.  Absorbance of dispersed solutions at different sonication time of  minutes,  minutes,  hour,  hours and  hours under DC field of a  V and b  V DC field 
In Figure  (a) for  V case there is no significant change in absorbance, at different sonication time. Thus even after an  hour of continuous sonication under the V DC field the individual SWCNT do not exfoliate to form a well dispersed solution. For  V case in Figure  (b) it is clearly seen that absorbance increases with increasing sonication time which indicates dispersion of SWCNT in presence of DC field. At low sonication time of  minutes and  minutes no broad peaks in visible regions were observed. This is because this time of sonication was not sufficient enough to exfoliate the individual CNTs in the visible region. So distinct peaks M and S were absent. The distinct peaks M and S begin to appear after an hour of sonication and take a prominent peak after  hour and  hours of sonication under the DC field. Thus higher sonication time of  hour or more was needed for SWCNT to disperse in water without use of surfactants under the V DC field. The improvement in dispersion of SWCNT without use of any surfactant can be explained as follows: When SWCNT in distilled water is under sonication treatment, the shock wave produced during the high pressure cycle of sonication disentangles some of the SWCNTs bundles. When sonication is removed these individual SWCNT come in contact and entangle to form clusters. These clusters gradually settle down and no longer get dispersed. However, when sonication is performed in the presence of a DC field then individual SWCNT or cluster may come in contact with negatively charged aluminum electrodes. As the work function of SWCNT is . eV [] which is higher than that of aluminum electrode which is . eV [], the electron affinity of SWCNT becomes higher than aluminum. This results in transfer of electrons from the cathode of electrodes to SWCNT particles. Similarly, when SWCNT clusters come in contact with negatively charged aluminum electrodes it becomes negatively charged due to transfer of charges. The number of charged SWCNT particles increases as they come in contact with electrodes. The SWCNT gets negatively charged and makes a complex network of SWCNT between electrodes. Due to sonication it detaches from aluminum electrodes and remains in solution. Due to repulsion between individual SWCNT in clusters, SWCNT is easily disentangled in the sonication process. Thus the sonication in the DC field helps to disentangle the entangled SWCNT particles and a well dispersed solution is prepared. The schematic representation for dispersion of SWCNT is as shown in figure . 

 min
 min
 hour  hours
 hours Voltage supply =  V
Sedimentation time =  hours Sonication time

Wavelength (nm)
 min
 min
 hour  hour  hour Applied voltage = v
sedimentation time =  hours sonication time Absorbance (a.u) Absorbance(a.u)

 
 Fig.  Schematic diagram showing progress of dispersion of SWCNT in DC field 
In figure  it is observed that on increasing the DC field from  V to  V the absorbance or the degree of dispersion was found to increase. Further, increasing the DC field to  V and higher the degree of SWCNT dispersion was found to decrease. The highest degree of dispersion was observed at  V DC Field. Thus, further increasing the DC field to  V and beyond might not change the result as a higher DC field of  V was not effective in increasing the dispersion. This can be explained by the fact that; our dispersion system is very similar to alkaline water electrolysis in which an alkaline solution is replaced by a SWCNT solution. In normal condition water splits around . to  V [], as a result of hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the electrodes. However, in our case due to high electrolytic resistance the potential becomes high and water electrolysis doesn’t take place even at  V and SWCNT gets dispersed as described above. When applied voltage is above  V, the electrolysis of water i.e. HER and OER start at electrodes and production of hydrogen and oxygen takes place. Thus produced gas at the electrode restricts the bundles and clusters of SWCNT to come in contact with the electrode plate and blocks the transfer of charges from electrode to bundles of SWCNTs. Due to deficiency in transfer of electron form electrodes, the disentangled process of SWCNT cannot happen. This results in re-aggregation and entanglement of SWCNT bundles to clusters which will eventually decrease the dispersion in higher voltages. Although  V is the observed optimum voltage required for dispersion of SWCNT, this is only for our experimental parameters	 like voltage steps, SWCNT concentration used. Depending upon the SWCNT concentration used over potential of water electrolysis changes and accordingly optimum voltage required for dispersion will change. 

. Conclusions 

The DC field assisted dispersion of SWCNT has been carried with and without use of any surfactant. The absorbance study of SWCNT shows that the application of DC field under sonication has increased the degree of dispersion. Moreover, the lower voltage of  V DC was effective in improvising the dispersion. Further the minimization in use of SWCNT has been carried out. The modified system of dispersion was able to reduce the amount of SWCNT needed for dispersion. 

Acknowledgments 
Authors also thank the department of physics Amrit Science Campus, Kathmandu and Patan Multiple Campus, Lalitpur, Tribhuvan University, Nepal for managing the research laboratory required to complete this work. 

Funding information 
The authors thank the University Grant Commission (UGC), Nepal for supporting this work in all respects. 

Compliance with ethical standards 
Availability of data and material 
All of the data and materials are according to the recording of data when performing experiments and are available from the corresponding author upon request. 

Financial interests 
The authors declare they have no financial interests. 

Conflict of interest 
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

